This is one of the Personal Rapid Transit vehicles at London Heathrow Airport.
It will take you from one of the parking places to Terminal 5,
and from Terminal 5 to one of the parking spaces.
And that's about it.
When it was installed in 2011,
this was the future of transport.
But it did not go that well.
And worse:
this had been done 35 years earlier.
Because in 1975, West Virginia University opened this:
their own Personal Rapid Transit system.
The vehicles here in the town of Morgantown may not be so flashy and rounded ...
but there are 70 pieces, more people are going,
and they go to five different stations along a track of 12.5 kilometers.
This is really personal transport: you press a button,
and a cart arrives to take you wherever you want, non-stop.
During the rush hour a trolley comes every few minutes
for each chosen destination
The PRT never stands still.
We have been transporting for 40 years without any major incident.
25 centimeters of snow and everything is still flawless.
That is because we have a heated track here.
Children do not like it, because the school stays open!
There are no variables; if I go from point A to point B,
if it were eight minutes, it will take eight minutes.
In 1970, the only option for students to travel
between all different university campuses, there was a fleet of buses.
But Morgantown is a city with steep hills and narrow roads,
so the result was that the traffic was stuck.
And at that time
American politicians were a bit crazy about systems like this.
Richard Nixon announced that development subsidy was available,
and a senator from West Virginia, Robert Byrd,
who was particularly known for how much money he managed to get back to his own state,
he managed to select Morgantown as a test area.
Boeing and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory
were working on this system.
The current system can handle more than 4,000 passengers per hour.
Every vehicle, when it leaves a station, has a route.
Every time a vehicle goes over a detector,
this is registered by the electronics
Which then send this to a central control room,
and then that message is displayed on a big screen in that room.
And all those flashing lights are detectors,
but they also symbolize 5 seconds of travel time.
In the world of trains the route is determined on the track.
So the track moves physically
to send a vehicle another track.
In our system, the vehicle itself determines which way it goes.
The result of all that work in the seventies ...
Well, that was huge about budget and a bit rough in the beginning,
but that happens with prototypes.
The important thing: it works
And it worked well enough to expand and keep up to the 21st century.
One of the problems we have today
is the aging of parts for the vehicle,
as well as for the electronics of the system.
In the 70s the Minuteman was missile system
the basis for the electronics of this system.
And there is a company called Thalys,
and they are now working on upgrading the electronics and software of the system.
The old system uses slightly different technology to guide the carts over the track.
The carts do not know where they are on the track.
In the new system, the Thalys system, they will know where they are.
That helps enormously if you want to know where a car is.
The technical manual of this system is on the website of the WVU,
and it's brilliant for the 70s.
Like the "pods" at Heathrow decades later,
this should be the future of transport.
But, why did not that happen?
Why do not systems like this exist everywhere?
Well, in most cases you can do almost anything with normal trams
with less costs and less political risk.
Of course, the PRT is slightly faster and more efficient,
and it is a little more pleasant to drive,
because every trip is non-stop -
but the rest of the world went for cheaper
simpler systems ... with less charm.
It is the backbone of our transport network.
It is also an icon for this institute.
We have a number of challenges,
but we have great staff, a dedicated, passionate group
who simply find a way to keep this system working.
It's a bit like "the little engine that could" [a British children's story]
Thanks to everyone from the Morgantown PRT and the University of West Virginia.
Look in the description for more information about them, and about the university!